Coming to Texas A&M is like joining a big family with more than 65,000 full-time members. In addition to fanatical school spirit, Texas A&M offers leading programs in the natural sciences, engineering, and business. To succeed in this mass of humanity, students must find their academic niche. The student body is 95 percent Texan, and out-of-staters should be prepared for serious culture shock.

Known for top-notch science and engineering programs and unsurpassed school spirit, Texas A&M opened in 1876 as the state’s first public institution of higher education: a land grant college with a military training focus. Today, this school of more than 50,000 full-time undergrads boasts a massive endowment and innumerable traditions. When they’re not studying for rigorous classes, Aggies may be found at Midnight Yell before each home and away football game or yelling—as the saying around campus goes, “Aggies don’t cheer, we yell!”—for their teams at other high-energy athletic events.

“Aggieland” is the largest university campus in the country (5,200 acres)—something made obvious to students every time they walk to class or take the student-driven buses. The campus combines historic brick buildings from the turn of the 20th century with new, modern facilities and is pulled together by a heavy cover of live oak trees. Renovations take place on a regular basis, and new additions include the 140,000-square-foot Instructional Laboratory & Innovative Learning Classroom Building, and Aggie Park, a 20-acre outdoor recreational space that includes a lake with catch-and-release fishing and hundreds of freshly planted trees.

The general education requirements include communication; math; life and physical sciences; language, philosophy, and culture; creative arts; American history; government; and social/behavioral sciences. Entering students participate in Hullabaloo U, a first-year experience class introducing them to the school. While Texas A&M is best known for its agriculture, engineering, and veterinary medicine colleges, the university is cultivating a strong liberal arts program and an even stronger business school. Psychology, biomedical sciences, mechanical engineering, and computer science tend to be the most popular majors. The fine arts programs in performance studies, dance science, philosophy, and classics are also strong.

Students generally agree that while academics are taken seriously here, the climate is, in the words of a junior, “definitely collaborative.” Teaching assistants and grad students are often found behind lecterns, and 27 percent of classes have more than 50 students. Undergraduate research is, unsurprisingly, important here, and getting involved is “as easy as emailing a professor and starting that conversation,” says a biomedical engineering major. Highly motivated students also recommend the University Honors Program as a good way to make friends and enjoy perks like “priority registration, access to smaller classes with better professors, and networking with the brightest minds here at Texas A&M,” according to one participant. Studying, working, and volunteering sometimes take students far from Aggieland—Texas A&M is a leader among American public universities in sending students abroad, mostly in short-term programs; more than 100 faculty-led programs are available, along with hundreds of other options through partnerships and exchange programs worldwide.

Ninety-five percent of undergraduates are from Texas, and just 1 percent come from other countries. Even if you’re not from Texas, Aggies are known for their friendliness. Says one, “From your first tour on campus to the day you graduate, no matter who you are, you’ll be greeted with a smile and a ‘Howdy!’” Black students make up 2 percent of the student body, Asian Americans 13 percent, Hispanics/Latinos 25 percent, and multiracial students 4 percent. The campus is decidedly conservative, and a senior comments that “not many rallies or political protests are organized here.” Athletes compete for hundreds of scholarships, while scholars vie for thousands of merit awards averaging $4,700. In-state students can lock in their tuition rate for four years, but out-of-staters are subject to tuition increases.

A&M’s single-sex and co-ed dorms range from cheap and not-so-comfortable to expensive and cushy (with private bathrooms and in-unit laundry machines), but they accommodate only 21 percent of undergrads. A communication major recommends the university’s freshman living/learning communities as a chance to “meet people with similar interests as you” and because “applying for one can help guarantee a spot to live on campus.” Most upperclassmen live in the numerous apartments and houses in College Station or its twin city, Bryan, and the university runs an extensive bus system throughout the community. Dining halls, fast-food chains, snack shops, and food trucks are all over campus. “I’m never afraid on campus that my things will get stolen or that I will be in danger,” says a nonprofit management major.

When it comes to social life, a junior advises, “It is imperative that you join a student organization in order to make A&M feel a little smaller and to really find your niche and purpose.” With more than 1,100 student-led clubs and organizations to choose from, students should have little trouble fitting in. Greeks attract 6 percent of the men and 15 percent of the women, and students say that, with such a large student body, neither Greek life nor partying define the social scene. Students appreciate the amenities of the surrounding area, especially in the Northgate district, which offers ample restaurants and bars. “College Station is a model college town,” asserts a senior. When the school empties out for holidays, the town does too. Students are actively involved in the community, and the Big Event, which draws thousands of Aggies each year, is the nation’s largest student-run, one-day community service event. Those seeking a getaway can drive an hour and a half to either Houston or Austin, and the beaches of the Gulf Coast beckon.

Texas A&M is practically synonymous with tradition. Boasts one senior, “You could write a book—and many have—about all the traditions we have here.” Favorites include the 12th Man, in which all students stand for the entirety of every football game as a symbol of their loyalty and readiness to take the field, and Aggie Muster, held in more than 300 locations around the world to remember alumni who died within the year. There’s also the 400-plus member Fightin’ Texas Aggie Band. The famous Corps of Cadets is one of the largest uniformed leadership training programs in the country, with about 2,100 cadets. Although just a fraction of the student body, the Corps remains the single most important keeper of the spirit and traditions of Aggieland.

Athletics, whether on the varsity level or for recreation, are at the top of almost anyone’s list here. The school’s 20 varsity teams compete in the ultracompetitive Division I Southeastern Conference (SEC), where they face powerhouses such as Alabama and LSU. Since joining the SEC in 2012, Texas A&M has won five national titles (the latest being women’s tennis in 2024) and 30 conference championships. Football fans rock Kyle Field with cries of “Gig ’em, Aggies,” or “Hump it, Ags,” and after every Aggie touchdown, fans kiss their dates. Basketball, flag football, racquetball, and soccer are among the most popular sports in the well-organized and extensive intramural program.

Texas A&M is undeniably gargantuan, yet it is also self-consciously familial. “A great school will challenge and nurture you to become an individual who is ready to conquer any problem in the world—and that right there is Texas A&M,” says one satisfied biology major. With varied educational opportunities and memorable traditions worth cheering (that is to say, “yelling”) about, it’s no wonder students here are so devoted to their “Aggie Family.”