Sweet Home Alabama, where the skies are so blue and the spirit of football lasts year-round. Auburn was once called Alabama Polytechnic Institute, and today AU’s programs in engineering, agriculture, and the health fields are still among its best. AU’s down-home, small-town atmosphere may feel claustrophobic to those from outside the Deep South. As for the role of football, the $14 million scoreboard says it all.

Founded in 1856, Auburn University is a public land grant university that excels in professional and technical fields such as architecture, engineering, and agriculture. But the school also welcomes students with frenzied athletics, warm and cozy hospitality, and Southern charm. “It truly is a family atmosphere. We are here to learn and help each other,” says one happy Tiger.

The town of Auburn, which grew up amid miles of forest and farmland largely to serve the university, is called the “loveliest village of the plain,” a moniker taken from a line in an Oliver Goldsmith poem. The campus stretches for nearly 2,000 acres, graced by mossy trees, lush lawns, and majestic colonnades. Most buildings are redbrick and Georgian in style, with some more modern facilities grouped in a compact central location. Newer facilities include the $70 million Gogue Performing Arts Center and the $35 million Mell Classroom Building, which includes 26 state-of-the-art engaged learning spaces along with dining venues and study areas.

Auburn’s core curriculum includes courses in the humanities and fine arts, science and mathematics, and social sciences. A writing-in-the-disciplines program bolsters every major with significant writing instruction. To ease the transition into college life, freshmen undergo the two-day Camp War Eagle orientation. Auburn’s SKILL Program provides academic coaching for students with learning differences and ADHD. The academic climate varies by department, and a senior says, “Rather than students competing with each other for higher grades, they are more willing to help their classmates through tutoring or group study sessions.” Regardless of the rigor, students say professors generally go the extra mile for them. “Although I have not liked every teacher I’ve had, every teacher has taught me something new and useful,” reasons a junior.

The engineering, architecture, agriculture, and pharmacy programs are stellar. Auburn boasts a first-of-its-kind program in wireless engineering for students who want to design network hardware or software for cell phones and other mobile devices. The Ginn College of Engineering also offers aerospace engineering, and Auburn has produced six NASA astronauts. The most popular majors include marketing, mechanical engineering, supply chain management, and finance, and the environmental science, pharmacy, and interior architecture programs also draw attention. Accelerated degree programs in numerous fields allow eligible students to count approved graduate hours toward both a bachelor’s and a master’s degree with the goal of completing both in as little as five years.

“The academic climate of Auburn is based heavily on professional development,” says an accounting major, so the co-op program, which provides pay and credit in several professional fields, is increasingly popular. Five interdisciplinary areas identified as “strategic research clusters” compete for millions of dollars in special funding, which means more opportunities for undergrads to assist faculty with research in areas including health disparities, pharmaceutical engineering, climate and earth systems science, omics (yes, it’s a word) and informatics, and scalable energy conversion science and technology. Opportunities for undergrads to work with faculty on research are abundant. Eight percent of students join the Honors College, which culminates in a six-credit Senior Year Experience that may involve a traditional thesis, enhanced study abroad, service learning, or other capstone project. Twenty percent of students study in over 35 countries on faculty-led expeditions. Closer to home, the Rural Studio program sends students in the College of Architecture, Design, and Construction to live in economically underserved Hale County, Alabama, to design and build innovative community buildings and homes for locals.

“Auburn students have real Southern charm but they are also cultured and diverse in interests and backgrounds,” says a junior. Indeed, 54 percent of Auburn undergraduates are Alabama natives, and many are second- or third-generation legacies. Black students account for a mere 4 percent of the largely homogeneous student body, Hispanics/Latinos represent 4 percent, Asian Americans make up 3 percent, and multiracial students add 3 percent; 2 percent hail from foreign countries. The conservative tone of this public Bible Belt campus makes it hospitable for more than 30 Christian student groups. “Half of Auburn students love politics and enjoy the political process, while the other half wouldn’t know where their polling place was if you gave them a map,” quips one senior. In an effort to increase diversity and address racial disparities on campus, Auburn has tripled the amount of money that it allocates to need-based financial aid for incoming freshmen. The university also awards merit scholarships averaging $8,300 and more than 400 athletic scholarships in 21 sports.

The majority of Auburn’s 24 residence halls are co-ed by floor, but there are several single-sex halls; 17 percent of undergrads live in college housing. First-year students compete for rooms on a first-come, first-served basis with returning students, and the dorms fill up fast. “Get on a waiting list ASAP,” advises a junior. The university helps those moving off campus find apartments and roommates. Twenty-six percent of Auburn men join fraternities, and 45 percent of women join sororities, perhaps because chapters get space in the best dorms. Students grumble about the mandatory—and pricey—meal plan, but, says an exercise science and nutrition major, “The Edge at Central Dining is the newest dining hall edition featuring nine different food stations that have a huge variety to accommodate all allergen and dietary restrictions as well as different cultures and cuisines.”

Aside from varsity sporting events and off-campus fraternity and apartment parties, students enjoy school-sponsored concerts, free movies, and plenty of intramural leagues. “Social life is great whether you are Greek or not,” says a freshman. The campus is officially dry, except on game days, and students say the alcohol policy is enforced. “Auburn has a very family atmosphere, so the tailgating is spread out and family-oriented,” says a junior. Long-standing traditions include Hey Day, when everyone wears a name tag and walks around saying, “Hey!” Students participate in a variety of community service programs, frequently as part of service-learning courses.

Auburn is a football powerhouse with pockets as deep as its location in the South and values to match. The school’s $14 million video scoreboard was hailed by the athletic director as “a great asset, not only for our fans but also our students and our prospective student-athletes.” Okay! On fall Saturdays, nearly 90,000 screaming fans turn the campus into Alabama’s fifth-largest city, and the rallying cry “Warrrrr Eagle!” rocks the place each time an Auburn back runs to daylight. The annual Iron Bowl pits Auburn against Southeastern Conference archrival Alabama. Other solid Tigers teams include men’s basketball, baseball, softball, golf, and women’s equestrian. Aubie, the official tiger mascot, has won a record 11 titles (mascots compete in national championships too) at the UCA Cheer and Dance competition. The Auburn Recreation and Wellness Center is a 240,000-square-foot facility containing everything from weight-training areas to a virtual golf simulator and an outdoor leisure pool.

The Auburn Creed, a beloved tradition, states a belief in the value of “work, hard work,” and Auburn is working hard to increase the caliber of its students and academic programs. “At Auburn, you’re encouraged to unlock your full potential,” says one senior, “with resources readily available to support your journey toward excellence.”