CWRU has most of the offerings available at Carnegie Mellon or WashU in St. Louis, but somehow it hasn’t quite found its deserved niche in the national consciousness. Students in the know sing its praises, especially since CWRU is less difficult to get into than other institutions of comparable, or even lesser, quality. Students get an outstanding technical education with solid offerings in other areas.

Cleveland’s Case Western Reserve University has much in common with Pittsburgh’s Carnegie Mellon. Both are the product of mergers between a technical college, known for excellence in engineering, and a more traditional university, focused on the arts and sciences. Both are located in erstwhile Rust Belt cities that have long since reinvented themselves through technology, medicine, education, and advanced manufacturing. And both tend to attract brainy students more concerned with studying than socializing. While CWRU has received less national attention than Carnegie Mellon and WashU, a senior calls it “a university on the rise”: applications have nearly doubled since 2013, and the school has become more selective. CWRU has also increased its investment in the arts, humanities, and social sciences, with an aim toward helping students connect these disciplines with their technical studies.

CWRU is located on the eastern edge of Cleveland at University Circle. This 550-acre area of parks and gardens is home to more than 50 cultural, educational, medical, and research institutions, including the city’s museums of art and natural history, its botanical gardens, and Severance Hall, home of the Cleveland Orchestra. Campus buildings are an eclectic mix of architectural styles, and several are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Peter B. Lewis Building (or “PBL,” as it’s known around campus), designed by Frank Gehry, is home to the Weatherhead School of Management and features undulating walls similar to those of Gehry’s Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain. The Tinkham Veale University Center (“the Tink”) meets LEED Silver standards and serves as a hub for campus dining, special events, and more than 200 student organizations, while the Sears think[box] is a fabrication lab designed to support cross-disciplinary entrepreneurial innovation. Two new residence halls for sophomores opened in 2024.

The product of the 1967 marriage between Case Institute of Technology and Western Reserve University, CWRU has four undergraduate schools: the College of Arts and Sciences, the Case School of Engineering, the Bolton School of Nursing, and the aforementioned Weatherhead School; all also offer graduate programs. All CWRU students must complete a common set of general education requirements in which students take classes involving written and oral communications, quantitative reasoning, and wellness, as well as moral and ethical reasoning, global perspectives, human diversity, and local and global engagement. Students must also submit a senior capstone experience portfolio. According to a biomedical engineering major, “CWRU is a collaborative environment that allows students to excel in their own way.”

CWRU’s strongest programs include engineering—especially the biomedical and mechanical kind—nursing, business management, computer science, and pre-architecture. The school’s polymer science major is one of the few such undergraduate programs in the country. Strengths in the College of Arts and Sciences include music (a joint program with the nearby Cleveland Institute of Music), psychology, anthropology (especially medical anthropology), and biology. Combined bachelor’s and master’s programs are popular, as is the Preprofessional Scholars program, which gives top freshmen conditional acceptance to CWRU’s medical or dental schools, assuming satisfactory progress through prerequisite courses. Half of all undergraduate classes enroll fewer than 20 students. “The quality of instruction is variable,” says a biology major, “but the majority of instructors are very good and willing to help at any time.”

Undergraduate research is highly encouraged, and 80 percent of students conduct research as part of senior capstone projects or independent studies. Thirty percent of students take part in study abroad, often in faculty-led programs during winter, spring, or summer breaks. For help with academic and career planning, every undergraduate is assigned a faculty advisor as well as a “navigator,” a staff member who assists them throughout their four years. “A navigator is a great resource for nonmajor-specific questions relating to campus resources, academic resources, club suggestions, etc.,” explains a freshman.

A senior says CWRU students are “driven, high achievers” who often “feel the need to prove themselves.” Eighteen percent of CWRU’s students are Ohio natives, and international students represent a strong contingent at 14 percent. Black students make up 6 percent of the student body, Asian Americans 27 percent, Hispanics/Latinos 12 percent, and multiracial students 5 percent. Diversity 360 is a campuswide training program designed to increase knowledge and awareness about diversity issues. Students describe the political climate as low-key, with liberals and conservatives both well represented on campus. Eligible students receive scholarships based on academic merit that average $27,500, but there are no athletic awards. The university has adopted a need-aware admissions policy that includes a commitment to meet the full demonstrated financial need of incoming freshmen.

Students are required to live on campus for their first two years, and 73 percent of all undergrads live in campus housing. Each first-year student participates in one of four residential colleges. “First-year rooms are adequate but nothing special,” says one student, but upperclassmen rave about the amenities in the university’s apartment-style suites. Dining-hall fare is “not Mom’s cooking every night, but it’s not bad,” reasons one student. Some upperclassmen opt for off-campus apartments within walking distance of campus. “As it is an urban campus, crime does occasionally happen in the surrounding area or (rarely) on campus,” reports a psychology major. “The school takes many strong measures to keep students safe, including many security officers and free rides across campus at night.”

As for social life, says a junior, “Case is not ideal for anyone who prioritizes a vibrant social scene, but students who enjoy being social and going to parties/bars are able to find enough opportunities.” On campus, there are dances, concerts, and movies. Fraternities and sororities draw 15 percent of the men and 13 percent of the women, but students report that Greek groups here are more focused on philanthropy than partying. Popular campus traditions include the Springfest carnival to celebrate the end of classes and “Study Overs,” where students gather during finals week for free food, massages, study groups, and more. The annual sci-fi movie marathon is a rite of passage, while Engineering Week features a fuel-cell-powered car competition.

CWRU is located five miles from downtown Cleveland, which provides ample opportunities for internships, volunteer work, dining, and entertainment. “We’re surrounded by museums and cultural institutions, which become a part of our education,” enthuses a history major. “It’s very budget-friendly,” adds a senior. The city features the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and—in the warmer months—major league baseball games at Progressive Field. Convenient RTA train passes are included in student charges for a reasonable price, but having a car can be helpful, especially for road trips to nearby cities in Ohio or for longer jaunts to Chicago.

Although sports are not a major focus on campus, the Spartans field 17 Division III teams, and the annual football game against Carnegie Mellon is big. Baseball and softball are recent University Athletic Association champions, and men’s and women’s cross-country, men’s tennis, and women’s soccer are nationally competitive. Twenty-one percent of students participate in at least one of the intramural and club sports available, ranging from flag football and pickleball to ice hockey, badminton, and fencing. The 26-mile Hudson Relay, held the last week of the spring semester to commemorate CWRU’s relocation from Hudson to Cleveland, pits teams of runners from the four classes against one another, with each person running a half mile.

A rigorous, science- and engineering-oriented research university, CWRU also devotes noteworthy attention to the student experience. “CWRU’s personality is friendly and spirited,” says a senior. “People can be self-deprecating and make a lot of jokes about Cleveland’s bad weather, but the campus community itself is warm and inviting.” With challenging academics, preprofessional programs, and research opportunities across all disciplines, students here are well-equipped to excel in their future careers.