Football is a major reason UM is on the map, but it’s hardly the only one. Renowned programs in marine science and music are big draws; business is also strong. Housing takes the form of a distinctive residential college system that includes living/learning opportunities. Attracts more Northerners than other leading Florida universities, with geographic reach continuing to expand.

Year-round sunshine and the colorful Miami culture could make even the most dedicated students forget why they are at college. But at the University of Miami, students can have their fun in the sun and get a solid education at the same time. The university, founded in 1925 when South Florida was beginning its boom, boasts a boatload of strong programs, including red-hot preprofessional offerings. Sound academics, a diverse and energetic student population, and a subtropical climate create a perfect storm that attracts talented Hurricanes from far and wide. “At UM you will find diversity, tradition, unity, and rivalry,” says one senior, “while getting an exceptional education.”

Twenty minutes from Key Biscayne and Miami’s beaches and 15 minutes from downtown Miami, the university’s 239-acre campus is located in a tranquil suburb of Coral Gables and features tall palms, wide lawns, flowering vines, outdoor sculptures, and even a butterfly garden. The campus, centered around Lake Osceola, is architecturally eclectic, from postwar, international-style structures to modern buildings, most with open-air breezeways to let in the warm winds. Recent additions include the massive, $153 million Lakeside Village, composed of 25 interconnected buildings featuring suite- and apartment-style housing for 1,100 students, recreational and dining areas, a 200-seat auditorium, and other facilities.

UM’s Cognates Program of General Education requires students to take at least three courses in each of three areas of knowledge: arts and humanities, people and society, and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math). With nine undergraduate schools and colleges and more than 100 majors and programs, UM offers a broad range of preprofessional options as well as those across the liberal arts. The university has one of the nation’s top programs in marine science, and its architecture and business programs are well regarded. UM was the first American university to offer a four-year undergraduate degree in music engineering. It has also developed a unique jazz program in the Frost School of Music. Accelerated degree programs in biochemistry and molecular biology, biology, chemistry, computer science, exercise physiology, Latin American studies, law, and marine geology receive high marks. The most popular majors are nursing, finance, economics, and psychology. The Foote Fellows Honors Program provides high-achieving students with more academic flexibility, opportunities for faculty-mentored research, and additional experiences.

UM’s academic environment manages to be “both competitive and collaborative,” says a junior. “Everyone wants to get into the best graduate programs, but they want their peers to do so as well.” Fifty-two percent of undergraduate classes have fewer than 20 students, and full professors do teach first-year students. Professors “are extremely accessible through office hours, and teaching assistants often reach out to students to help with workshops and extra study sessions,” explains a business management major. For a change of pace, students take advantage of more than 80 study abroad options in dozens of countries, including 12 UM semester-on-location programs in France, the Czech Republic, South Africa, Italy, and elsewhere.

“The students at UM are culturally and academically diverse, with so many interests and passions,” says one student. Sixty-nine percent of UM’s undergraduates come from out of state, including quite a few from the Northeast and upper Midwest, seeking respite from harsh weather. UM’s student body is impressively diverse; Hispanics/Latinos account for a substantial 23 percent of the total, Black students 8 percent, Asian Americans 5 percent, and multiracial students 4 percent. International students, who represent 8 percent of undergraduates and more than 90 countries, play an integral role in the life of the university. Numerous merit scholarships, averaging $23,800, are available, as are lots of athletic scholarships. The university meets 100 percent of the demonstrated financial need of all admitted students.

UM offers a distinctive system of residential colleges, modeled after those at Oxford and Cambridge. Each residential college has a live-in faculty member who works with staff to organize seminars, concerts, dinners, social events, and lectures, including guest speakers from all walks of life to discuss current issues. Generally, students give the dorms average marks; 36 percent of undergrads live on campus, and others bunk in off-campus apartments or commute. “Housing is slightly dismal in the beginning, but you soon become so engulfed in campus life that you don’t mind the dorms at all,” reasons a senior. Scrounging up food on campus is easy. “Our food court is very diverse with just about every food option you can think of,” says a senior. Students also report feeling safe on campus thanks to a robust security program that includes safety escorts, campus shuttles, and self-defense classes.

UM offers a plethora of social opportunities. “Miami is an incredible city, so there is always something fun to do with friends. The university is also constantly hosting activities on campus,” reports a student. The Rathskeller, a popular meeting place on campus, is a student-run grill that offers food, entertainment, a venue for postgame parties, and more. Campus alcohol policies are strict for underage students, but an art history major says, “The drinking and party culture on campus is not something that proves to be a massive issue.” Off campus, however, frat parties and Miami’s many bars, nightclubs, and festivals keep things lively. Fraternities account for 19 percent of the men, and sororities, with no housing of their own, attract 21 percent of the women. Students anticipate annual events such as International Week and SportsFest, which pits housing areas against each other in sports ranging from flag football to obstacle courses. The biggest service event each year is Gandhi Day, during which hundreds of students spend the day doing community service.

Coral Gables (population 48,000) is not a college town. “We are a college in a big city,” says a junior, which means access to events such as Miami’s Art Basel, Ultra Music Festival, and the Miami Open (tennis), as well as professional sports teams (Dolphins, Heat, Marlins, Inter Miami CF). Those seeking to explore different culinary delights head to Coconut Grove, Wynwood, or Brickell. Public transportation and the Hurry ’Canes Shuttle service run in front of the residential colleges. On-campus parking is limited, but most students recommend a car anyway. The best road trips are Key West, the Everglades, and, of course, UM football games against rival Florida State.

The Hurricanes compete in the Division I Atlantic Coast Conference. The most competitive teams are football, baseball, men’s and women’s diving, basketball, tennis, and track and field. In a nod to Harry Potter fans, the extensive club sports program includes Quidditch, in addition to flag football, soccer, basketball, and more. The university also has a state-of-the-art recreation facility that includes an 18,000-square-foot fitness room and basketball, racquetball, squash, and tennis courts, plus an indoor pool and a juice bar.

It’s hard to imagine a school in the Sunshine State without a generous allotment of fun, and UM is no exception. “Though we’re not the number one party school in the nation anymore, we still really love to have a great time,” observes a junior. That said, UM students these days are just as likely to search long and hard for the perfect instrumental phrase or mathematical proof as they are to scope out the perfect wave.