With a student body the size of a small city, Penn State is strong in fields from meteorology and business to film and television. The 1,800-student Schreyer Honors College is one of the nation’s elite programs. Although its athletic programs have tended to grab most of the headlines (not always positive), Penn State remains one of the premier public universities academically.

Living it up with over 40,000 fellow full-time undergraduates in what sportswriters have long dubbed Happy Valley is probably not for the faint of heart. But those who can muster the energy to take advantage of Penn State’s legendary school spirit and to navigate its vast sea of academic options will be rewarded with stellar programs in engineering, the sciences, and other fields appropriate to a land grant university.

With an eclectic architectural mix, including white-columned brick, stone, and some modern apartments, Penn State, which was founded in 1855, continues to experience growth as major renovation and expansion projects proceed. New facilities and renovations are constantly underway. The $144 million Chemical and Biomedical Engineering Building is among the newer additions to campus. “Penn State just keeps growing and improving itself,” says one student.

Penn State’s general education requirements consist of 45 credits that include several communications and quantification courses as well as humanities, arts, natural sciences, social and behavioral sciences, and health and physical education courses. The incorporation of critical-thinking skills has been a priority in redesigning the general curriculum. In addition, undergrads must enroll in courses on U.S. and international diversity. One helpful program offered to freshmen is LEAP (Learning Edge Academic Program), which gives new students the benefit of a big university while making it seem small. Students in LEAP take a team approach by taking classes and living together. About 1,800 of the university’s best and brightest are invited to participate in the Schreyer Honors College, which offers opportunities for research and an honors thesis, as well as honors options in regular courses.

The most popular majors at Penn State fall under the categories of engineering, business, computer and information sciences, and social sciences. The university maintains strong programs in the scientific and technical fields such as earth sciences, engineering, forensic science, and life sciences, as well as nutrition and family studies. The meteorology program boasts alumni worldwide, including the founder of AccuWeather, an internationally renowned private forecasting firm. The College of Information Sciences and Technology is designed to prepare students for the digital age. The College of Agricultural Sciences has extensive facilities that include huge livestock barns. Its food sciences program is one of the best in the nation. Dairy products from the school’s cows are sold at an on-campus store, and courses are offered in the production of its famous ice cream. Students can choose from more than 160 undergraduate majors and more than 190 graduate fields spread over 24 locations statewide, including the College of Medicine and Dickinson Law, both located near Harrisburg, and Penn State Law on the University Park campus. Combined undergraduate/graduate degree options are available, as are engineering co-op programs, distance learning, and student-designed majors.

“The one thing about Penn State is that your academic experience is completely what you make it,” counsels one student. Some of the intro-level lecture courses draw up to 400 students at University Park, yet most students seem to agree that classes are excellent and require your full attention. Students report that professors are accessible and engaging—when they are teaching; grad students frequently take on that responsibility. For cramming outside of class, the Penn State library system contains 8.6 million volumes. Roughly 16 percent of students study abroad through nearly 300 summer, semester, and full-year programs offered in roughly 50 countries.

“Penn State students are active, fun, and open-minded,” says one student. Sixty-three percent of undergraduates are residents of Pennsylvania, with 10 percent hailing from foreign nations. More than half of Penn State’s undergrads who finish at University Park began their education at one of the university’s 19 undergraduate campuses across the state. Many students note that race and diversity issues can be pronounced on a campus that is still pretty homogeneous for a public university: Asian Americans make up 7 percent of the undergrad population, Black students 5 percent, Hispanics/Latinos 9 percent, and multiracial students 4 percent. Hundreds of athletic scholarships are available in 29 varsity sports, as are thousands of merit awards, averaging $5,600.

Freshmen must live in the dorms, which students say are comfortable and located near classroom buildings and dining facilities. Overall, 35 percent of students live on campus; the rest find a home off campus, often in downtown apartments. “I loved living in the dorms,” reports one public relations major. “I think it’s part of the whole college experience, and I made some great friends along the way.” The meal plan operates on a point system where you pay for what you eat. Stand for State is a comprehensive bystander intervention program covering sexual assault, drug and alcohol use, acts of bias, and mental health concerns.

“Social life at Penn State is huge,” says a freshman. Seventeen percent of men and 20 percent of women go Greek. Partying at Penn State mostly happens at fraternities, but the administration has been focusing on measures to increase student safety and reduce dangerous drinking, hazing, and sexual assault, including imposing new rules for social events sponsored by Greek organizations. Greek Chapter Scorecards track conduct violations and disciplinary actions, as well as academic performance, community service hours, and philanthropic fund-raising efforts, for every Greek chapter on campus. For social alternatives, the HUB (the campus union building) offers nonalcoholic entertainment, and more than 1,000 student organizations keep students busy too. Favorite annual events include the mid-July arts festival, the Dance Marathon, and, of course, Homecoming.

University Park students take advantage of the picturesque and peaceful locale by engaging in outdoorsy activities, including skiing and snowboarding at a nearby slope, and sailing, canoeing, hiking, and renting cabins in Stone Valley. State College offers restaurants, bars, and cultural events such as symphonies, theatrical shows, and ballets, while the Bryce Jordan Center hosts top-notch performers. The town may be small, but according to a biochem major, “a majority of the students get involved in community service to maintain and constantly improve town relations.”

Penn State was once viewed as the model of how the values of big-time football and academic excellence could coexist, but this image took a major hit in 2011 with the conviction of a former assistant football coach as a sexual predator. Since then, new leadership, governance, and other changes have sought to put the scandal in the rearview mirror. When thousands of alumni converge to cheer on their Nittany Lions (named after a type of local mountain lion) in blue and white, the festivities include tailgating replete with pregame parties and postgame revelry. As a member of the Big Ten, Penn State’s foes include Michigan and Ohio State, both of which make great road trips. Nittany Lions teams have won 80 national team championships in a wide variety of sports; the men’s wrestling team has brought home 10 national titles in the last three years. Men’s lacrosse and men’s and women’s soccer are recent conference champions. There are three large gyms, a competitive-size pool, an indoor ice rink, and an extensive program of intramural and club sports for the recreational athlete, including a large angler’s club.

After a period of agonizing soul-searching about what led to its football scandal a decade ago and more recent Greek life troubles, Penn State’s sense of pride and community spirit have reasserted themselves. As one proud Lion explains, “Imagine a family of 40,000—the excitement, compassion, and sense of belonging.”